feat: benchmark Cairo code using snforge + cairo profiler (#996)
cairo-book/cairo-book: src/ch10-01-how-to-write-tests.md

Note the `#[test]` annotation: this attribute indicates this is a test function, so the test runner knows to treat this function as a test. We might also have non-test functions to help set up common scenarios or perform common operations, so we always need to indicate which functions are tests.

> We use the `#[cfg(test)]` attribute for the `tests` module, so that the compiler knows the code it contains needs to be compiled only when running tests. This is actually not an option: if you put a simple test with the `#[test]` attribute in a _lib.cairo_ file, it will not compile. We will talk more about the `#[cfg(test)]` attribute in the next [Testing Organization][testing organization] section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the `#[cfg(test)]` attribute for the `tests` module, so that the compiler knows the code it contains needs to be compiled only when running tests. This is actually not an option: if you put a simple test with the `#[test]` attribute in a _lib.cairo_ file, it will not compile. We will talk more about the `#[cfg(test)]` attribute in the [Test Organization][test organization] section.
```

We use the `#[cfg(test)]` attribute for the `tests` module, so that the compiler knows the code it contains needs to be compiled only when running tests. This is actually not an option: if you put a simple test with the `#[test]` attribute in a _lib.cairo_ file, it will not compile. We will talk more about the `#[cfg(test)]` attribute in the next [Test Organization][test organization] section.

The example function body uses the `assert_eq!` macro, which contains the result of adding 2 and 2, which equals 4. This assertion serves as an example of the format for a typical test. We'll explain in more detail how `assert_eq!` works later in this chapter. Let’s run it to see that this test passes.

The `scarb test` command runs all tests found in our project, and shows the following output:

```shell
$ scarb test
Collected 1 test(s) from adder package
Running 1 test(s) from src/
[PASS] adder::tests::it_works (gas: ~1)

> Tests: 1 passed, 0 failed, 0 skipped, 0 ignored, 0 filtered out

Reviewer: this could be a reference to an output.txt file, right ?

Author: Yes. Most of the outputs were not output.txt files
I noticed lately that one was an output.txt and that I should do it for all of them.

That's why I created a separate issue for it

It’s possible to mark a test as ignored so it doesn’t run in a particular instance; we’ll cover that in the [Ignoring Some Tests Unless Specifically Requested](#ignoring-some-tests-unless-specifically-requested) section later in this chapter. Because we haven’t done that here, the summary shows `0 ignored`. We can also pass an argument to the `scarb test` command to run only a test whose name matches a string; this is called filtering and we’ll cover that in the [Running Single Tests](#running-single-tests) section. Since we haven’t filtered the tests being run, the end of the summary shows `0 filtered out`.

Let’s start to customize the test to our own needs. First change the name of the `it_works` function to a different name, such as `exploration`, like so:

```cairo, noplayground
{{#include ../listings/ch10-testing-cairo-programs/listing_10_01/src/lib.cairo:exploration}}
```

Then run `scarb test` again. The output now shows `exploration` instead of `it_works`:

```shell

> $ scarb test

Reviewer: same

Collected 1 test(s) from adder package
Running 1 test(s) from src/
[PASS] adder::tests::exploration (gas: ~1)
Tests: 1 passed, 0 failed, 0 skipped, 0 ignored, 0 filtered out
```

Now we’ll add another test, but this time we’ll make a test that fails! Tests fail when something in the test function panics. Each test is run in a new thread, and when the main thread sees that a test thread has died, the test is marked as failed. Enter the new test as a function named `another`, so your _src/lib.cairo_ file looks like in Listing {{#ref second-test}}.

<span class="filename">Filename: src/lib.cairo</span>

```cairo, noplayground
{{#include ../listings/ch10-testing-cairo-programs/listing_10_02/src/lib.cairo:exploration-and-another}}
```

{{#label second-test}}
<span class="caption">Listing {{#ref second-test}}: Adding a second test in _lib.cairo_ that will fail</span>

Run `scarb test` and you will see the following output:

```shell

> Collected 2 test(s) from adder package

Reviewer: same - what's the reason for modifying the ref to output.txt here?

Now that you’ve seen what the test results look like in different scenarios, let’s look at some functions that are useful in tests.

[structs]: ./ch05-01-defining-and-instantiating-structs.md

> [testing organization]: ./ch10-02-testing-organization.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[test organization]: ./ch10-02-test-organization.md
```

{{#include ../listings/ch10-testing-cairo-programs/no_listing_06_test_gas/src/lib.cairo}}
```

> ## Benchmarking Cairo Programs Using Starknet Foundry and Cairo Profiler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Benchmarking Cairo Programs
```

by "default" we will be using Starknet Foundry

> [Starknet Foundry][starknet foundry] is a [toolchain][snfoundry intro] for developing smart contracts in Cairo. The second part of the book dedicated to Cairo Smart Contracts will describe the main features it allows.

Reviewer: 1. Add another section for Starknet Foundry here https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch01-01-installation.html#installing-scarb

2. In the main section of the installation page, a one-liner of what Starknet-Foundry is https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch01-01-installation.html#installation

3. https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch01-02-hello-world.html#creating-a-project-with-scarb change to pick Starknet Foundry instead

4. https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch10-01-how-to-write-tests.html#the-anatomy-of-a-test-function-1 here explicitly indicate to use Starknet Foundry

Author: I see that with scarb 2.8.3, starknet foundry becomes the default. but when choosing starknet foundry, we get edition 2023_07 instead of the latest

Reviewer: > edition 2023_07 instead of the latest, so i added one line to say it needs to be modified to the latest

I think your default starknet-foundry version is not the latest one. (but i have 2023_11 by default so in any case this deserves a bug report)

Author: I have the latest one and have 2023_07 as well

Reviewer: https://github.com/foundry-rs/starknet-foundry/pull/2562

Reviewer: in any case - you can remove the specific instruction to update the edition

Author: Perfect !

Author: done

> Starknet Foundry contains a profiling feature that might also be useful for benchmarking the number of steps used for Cairo programs, or only specific operations within programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starknet Foundry contains a profiling feature that is useful to analyze and optimize the performance of your Cairo programs.
```

> As mentioned in the [Hello, World][hello world] chapter, you can choose to set up Starknet Foundry as a dependency when creating a new project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The [profiling][profiling] feature allows you to produce the execution trace for every successful test you run, and use this trace to generate the profile output. That way, you can create custom tests, containing calls to functions of your program, or even isolated portions of Cairo code you want to benchmark.

1. Install [Cairo Profiler][cairo profiler] from Software Mansion.
2. Install [Go][go], [Graphviz][graphviz] and [pprof][pprof], all of them are required to visualize the generated profile output. 
3. Run `snforge test` command with `--save-trace-data` flag. `snforge` will produce a trace file for each passing test. These files will be stored in the _snfoundry_trace_ directory of your project.

> 4. Run `snforge test --build-profile`, generating the corresponding output files in the _profile_ directory.

Reviewer: directly `--build-profile`, no ?

Author: true! doing just `--build-profile` also generates the trace file

5. Run `go tool pprof -http=":8000" path/to/profile/output.pb.gz` to analyse a profile. This will start a web server at the specified port.

Let's reuse the `sum_n` function studied above:

```cairo
{{#include ../listings/ch10-testing-cairo-programs/no_listing_06_test_gas/src/lib.cairo}}
```

After generating the trace file and the profile output, running `go tool pprof` in your project will start the web server where you can find many useful information about the test that you ran:

- The test includes one function call, corresponding to the call to the test function:

> <div align="center">
>     <img src="pprof-function-call.png" alt="pprof function calls" width="800px"/>
> </div>

Reviewer: this one is useless 

```suggestion
```

Calling `sum_n` multiple times in the test function will still return 1 call. This is because `snforge` simulates a contract call when executing a test.

> - Overall, running the test required 325 Cairo steps, with 321 steps used by the test itself, including 256 steps to execute the `sum_n` function, and 35 steps used for the rest of the code of the test function:  

Reviewer: keep the information focused on `sum_n` only

Author: I think its worth keeping information about the number of steps used by the test itself. This feature is useful to copy paste a few lines, outside of a call to a function the cairo program

Reviewer: > I think its worth keeping information about the number of steps used by the test itself

What's important is not the benchmark of the test, but the benchmark of the function

Author: But if you don't want to benchmark a function of the program, but just some specific operations, you will copy paste these operations
But in this case yeah I agree

Author: done, i simplified, leaving just the information for our `sum_n` benchmarked function

{{#include ../listings/ch10-testing-cairo-programs/no_listing_06_test_gas/src/lib.cairo}}
```

## Benchmarking Cairo Programs

Starknet Foundry contains a profiling feature that is useful to analyze and optimize the performance of your Cairo programs.

> The [profiling][profiling] feature allows you to produce the execution trace for every successful test you run, and use this trace to generate the profile output. That way, you can create custom tests, containing calls to functions of your program, or even isolated portions of Cairo code you want to benchmark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [profiling][profiling] feature generates execution traces for successful tests, which are used to create profile outputs. This allows you to benchmark specific parts of your code.
```

> 
> 1. Install [Cairo Profiler][cairo profiler] from Software Mansion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To use the profiler, you will need to:
1. Install [Cairo Profiler][cairo profiler] from Software Mansion.
```
